---
title: Plugin Development (New Tutorial)
pageData:
- migration: new
- sidebar: will rename
---

# Plugin Development
<!-- edit this to actually match the tutorial for plugins ; 
also indicate somewhere that this tutorial assumes you've used the CLI tool -->

This tutorial will walk through plugin development for jspsych-contrib, using a very simple example. We'll go step-by-step through writing a plugin that records mindless clicking data from a given participant. This simple demonstration will highlight key open-science principles behind what makes a distributable plugin, including:

- Writing a `trial()` method that meets jsPsych plugin standards
- Basic DOM manipulation
- Writing to `data`
- Writing and referencing trial parameters
- Testing builds
- Preparing documentation through the `info` object
- Finalizing a pull request with jspsych-timeline using GitHub

Furthermore, this tutorial assumes you've set up the developer environment using the CLI tool `npx @jspsych/new-plugin`. This automates setup for a new plugin in either JavaScript or TypeScript. For more information about this tool, check out jspsych-contrib's [`README`](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-contrib?tab=readme-ov-file#guidelines-for-contributions).

If you want access to the templates themselves, without running the CLI tool, they are still available in the [jspsych-dev](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-dev) repository. There are [JavaScript](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-dev/tree/main/packages/new-plugin/templates/plugin-template-js) and [TypeScript](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-dev/tree/main/packages/new-plugin/templates/plugin-template-ts) templates available. 

Last, a note on nomenclatures. This tutorial uses "on next build" as a regular transition. This references the command `npm run build` that comes with the automated setup. Whenever changes are made to the plugin `src/index.ts`, this command needs to be run before those changes are reflected in the next plugin instance. You can see the plugin's frontend yourself by running this command in the environment directory first, then opening `examples/index.html` in your browser of choice. 

This tutorial also makes recurring but mutually distinct references to "users" and "participants." "Users" refers to researchers using the plugin for their own experiments. We'll assume users are only ever calling the plugin in their own HTML / Javascript files and setting parameters, but never interacting with the plugin `src`. 

"Participants" are the people carrying out the task in an actual study. We'll assume participants aren't seeing any code ever and are only ever interacting with the frontend webpage generated by the plugin instance. 

## Overview of `index.ts`

Our `index.ts` can be split into two writable sections: `const info` and `class MindlessClickingPlugin`.

`info` is a constant that contains all of the plugin's metadata. This includes its package name, the plugin version, citations, and all inputs and outputs. Inputs are described in the `parameters` object, while outputs are described in the `data` object. 

```javascript
const info = <const>{
	name: "plugin-mindless-clicking",
	version: version,
	parameters: {
		//
	},
	data: {
		//
	},
	citations: '__CITATIONS__'
}
```

Both `parameters` and `data` are unique `info` properties and take objects. They're used to automatically generate plugin documentation, once merged to our repository. Notes for documentation are demarcated using the docstrings format `/** ... */`, with descriptions of each parameter and data type. 

```javascript
parameters: {
	/** Provide a clear description of parameter_name1 that could be used as documentation. */
	parameter_name1: {
		//
	}
	/** Provide a clear description of parameter_name2 that could be used as documentation. */
	parameter_name2: {
		//
	}
}
```

```javascript
data: {
	/** Provide a clear description of data1 that could be used as documentation. */
	data1: {
		//
	}
	/** Provide a clear description of data2 that could be used as documentation. */
	data2: {
		//
	}
}
```

Additionally, the `parameters` property is used to check parameter inputs from the user and call default values for any required parameters. We'll describe this more in our section on [Writing Parameters](#writing-parameters).

The `class` declaration, in this case `class MindlessClickingPlugin`, is the second modifiable portion of `index.ts`. This is where we write the actual script for the plugin. It implements:

<!-- content from the original plugin-development.md -->
* [A static `info` property]() that contains `const info` from earlier, describing the plugin's parameters, data generated, and version.
* [A `constructor()`]() that accepts an instance of jsPsych. We'll be able to call that instance throughout the `trial` method below as `this.jsPsych`.
* [A `trial()` method]() that accepts an `HTMLElement` as first argument `display_element` and a trial parameters object as second argument `trial`. There is an optional third argument to [handle the `on_load` event]() in certain cirumstances. The `trial()` method should *either* invoke `jsPsych.finishTrial()` or <!-- check with Josh to verify this -->should be an `async` function that returns a data object to [end the trial and save data](#ending-the-trial).

```javascript
class MindlessClickingPlugin implements JsPsychPlugin<Info> {
	static info = info;
	
	constructor(private jsPsych: JsPsych) { }

	trial(display_element: HTMLElement, trial: TrialType<Info>){
		...
	}
}
```

Since it's the critical piece that implements plugin behavior, the next four sections will focus exclusively on writing the `trial()` method. Some preliminary information on its arguments:
* `display_element` will be what we invoke to manipulate elements on the DOM (Document Object Model)&mdash;the webpage served to the participant. 
* `trial` will be what we invoke to reference parameters and trigger specific outcomes in our script.

Let's start by adding elements to `display_element` and manipulating the DOM.

## Adding Elements to DOM

This section will go over how to update the webpage to display what we want to the participant.

The first thing we need to do before anything is delete the `jsPsych.finishTrial()` call in the default template. We're only doing this for now so that we can see changes to the DOM, as we run new builds. Otherwise, the `trial()` execution ends as soon as the method is run. We’ll reintroduce this call later anyway, since it's required for a compliant plugin package.

Now that we’ve done that, let’s write something for the participant to interact with: a basic button in HTML. We can assign a class to our button to style it with jsPsych’s built-in CSS:

```html
<div>
	<button class="jspsych-btn">
		Click Me!
	</button>
</div>
```

For the participant to actually see the button, we need to add our button to `display_element`. Let's assign it as a string value to `display_element.innerHTML`. `innerHTML` is a property inherited by `HTMLelement` types and is what stores DOM elements that participants can interact with. For more about `display_element` properties, reference [Mozilla’s documentation]() on the `HTMLelement` type.

<!-- check with Josh to see if this is necessary -->
We could make this assignment directly. However, we should take this opportunity to instill some best practices. For instance, writing directly to `innerHTML` leaves an opportunity for a malicious script injection. It’s a good idea to atomize our script and allow checks between each step. With that in mind, let's store our string in a separate `html` constant before reading that constant to `display_element.innerHTML`.

```javascript
const html = `<div>
		<button class="jspsych-btn">
			Click Me!
		</button>
	</div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;
```

Great! On first build, we can open `example.html` in our browser and see a basic stimulus for participants to interact with. We can even make our demand of the participant more explicit by adding a paragraph element underneath the button. 

```javascript
const html = `<div>
		<button class="jspsych-btn">
			Click Me!
		</button>
		<p>
			Click the button.
		</p>
	</div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;
```

As a heads up for the rest of the demo, we're not adding this paragraph to be redundant. We'll actually use our paragraph element as a reference to dynamically [manipulate the DOM](#event-listeners--dom-manipulation) and to [read user parameters](#writing-parameters) a bit later on.

## Event Listeners & DOM Manipulation

So, we have a button available for the participant to see and click on. Now we want the button to actually do something when clicked. To get our button to dynamically respond to the participant's button presses, we need to use an event listener. This will be a recurring tool in our Javascript kit, letting us do everything from updating the DOM to timing the trial end to logging participant data.

In short, event listeners execute functions whenever an event&mdash;like a click&mdash;is delivered to a specified target&mdash;like the button. We can add listeners to any element using the method `addEventListener`, which takes two arguments: the event, and the function.

Since `"click"` is already a mouse event built into Javascript, we can use that as our event argument. You can also check out [W3Schools' documentation](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_events.asp) for a list of other events already referenced by Javascript, as well as ways to define your own `CustomEvents`.

With our event covered, we just have to write the function we want our listener to execute. Let's keep it simple for now and write an empty function. We can add to it later as we think of things we want button clicks to do.

```javascript
function button_click_listener(){
}
```

However useless for the time being, we can now add our event listener to the button! The most direct way to do this would be with the `querySelector` Javascript method. We'll use the method to pick an element out of `display_element` and run `addEventListener` on the output. 

`querySelector` picks HTML elements based on CSS selectors, which are used to style bits of a webpage. The simplest CSS selectors are element names themselves, like a `div` or a `button`. Since we have just one `button` on our DOM, we could select the only `"button"` from `display_element` before adding our event listener. Since we’re atomizing our steps as a best practice, we’ll break that down into two steps, assigning the selected element to `const button` and then adding the listener to `button`.

```javascript
function button_click_listener(){
}

const button = display_element.querySelector("button");
button.addEventListener("click", button_click_listener);
```

While that works for now, it's not exactly flexible. `querySelector` will always pick out the first match. Say we have multiple buttons on our DOM, but we want a specific one to react to clicks. We'd only ever add our listener to the first "button" element in `display_element`.

We can fix this by just adding a different kind of CSS selector, an `id`, to our `html` constant from before. An `id` is unique, applied to only one DOM element at a time, and referenced with a hash (#). Let's give our button `id=“jspsych-mindless-clicking-button”`, then use that `id`, `”#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button”` as our `querySelector` argument.

```javascript
const html = `<div>
		<button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
			Click Me!
		</button>
		<p>
			Click the button.
		</p>
	</div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;

function button_click_listener(){
}

const button = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
button.addEventListener("click", button_click_listener);
```

It’s worth noting that classes, like the `class=”jspsych-btn”` used for styling, also work as CSS selectors. Like an `id`, a `class` is only ever assigned to an element by the developer, but unlike an `id`, it's non-unique and can be re-applied across multiple elements.

With this knowledge of selectors and listeners, we can put a dynamic click counter on the DOM. Let's introduce a `var clicks` and set it to 0. Then, let's actually make our listener do something by having `button_click_listener` iterate on `clicks` by plus 1.

```javascript
var clicks = 0;

function button_click_listener(){
	clicks++;
}
```

On next build, our plugin will start counting participant clicks in the background by updating the `clicks` variable. We could verify that by writing `console.log(clicks)` into `button_click_listener`, running another build, opening `examples/index.html`, and watching the developer console while clicking the button.

We can also make the DOM show this count directly to the participant. Let's use another `querySelector` to do that. We'll select the paragraph element, assign it to `const text_element`, then assign a string referencing `clicks` to its `innerHTML`.

```javascript
var clicks = 0;

function button_click_listener(){
	clicks++;
	const text_element = display_element.querySelector("p");
	text_element.innerHTML = `You've clicked the button ${clicks} times`;
}
```

We can once again make this more precise and flexible by giving our paragraph an `id` and reading that to `querySelector`.

```javascript
const html = `<div>
		<button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
			Click Me!
		</button>
		<p id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-text">
			Click the button.
		</p>
	</div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;

var clicks = 0;

function button_click_listener(){
	clicks++;
	const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
	text_element.innerHTML = `You've clicked the button ${clicks} times`;
}
```

We can instill another best practice here by compartmentalizing the steps that update our DOM into a helper function. We'll define these separately from `button_click_listener`, or "factor them out." That way, if we want other events to update the DOM, we can call that same function iteratively without redundantly copying and rewriting it. Better yet, if we choose to update the DOM in new ways, we only need to rewrite the helper function. Let's call this helper function `update_display`. 

```javascript
function update_display() {
	const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
	text_element.innerHTML = `You've clicked the button ${clicks} times`;
}

function button_click_listener(){
	clicks++;
	update_display();
}
```

Now we have a robust interface for the participant to interact with. She can not only click away at the button to her heart's content but get live feedback on her clicks.

These last two sections focused primarily on basic Javascript skills. The next section will pivot back to some jsPsych specific methods that we can use to make our build into a fully functional plugin, ready for distribution and use by other researchers.

## Ending the Trial

At this point, the participant has a clicker to tap endlessly. Great! As a jsPsych plugin though, this isn't very useful. We aren’t logging anything that the participant as data. Nor is there any way for the trial to end, trapping our participant in clicker limbo. Luckily, the solutions to both these issues are nearly one-in-the-same. 

As previously mentioned, the core jsPsych method for ending a plugin trial is `jsPsych.finishTrial()`. This method always takes the `data` object as its argument. By calling an end to our trial, we also stage our data for storage.

We call `finishTrial()` by referencing the plugin's jsPsych instance as `this.jsPsych`. We'll have to do this whenever we invoke a jsPsych method. That means we'll have to tweak the way we define our listener function. To break `this.jsPsych` down, `this` references the latest execution context, while jsPsych references any jsPsych instance in that context. If we call `this.jsPsych` in the function as is, `this` will reference the function, whose scope won’t include jsPsych by default.

To get around this, we can just declare `button_click_listener` as a constant that stores an arrow function. **[consider defining here what an arrow function is and why this works]** Once done, we can use `this` to reference plugin context `trial()`.

```javascript
const button_click_listener = () => {
	clicks++;
	update_display();
	this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
}
```

On next build, we can click the button to immediately end the trial and see the default `data` object.

We can also couch `finishTrial()` in a conditional if we want the participant to still click more than once. Let's say the participant needs to click the button 5 times before the trial will end.

```javascript
const button_click_listener = () => {
    clicks++;
    update_display();
    if (clicks == 5){
        this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
    }
}
```

As usual, we can compartmentalize this minimum clicks value into a separate `required_clicks` constant for some added flexibility.

```javascript
const required_clicks = 5

const button_click_listener = () => {
	clicks++;
    update_display();
    if (clicks == required_clicks){
        this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
    }
}
```

If we move our declaration of `required_clicks` to the top of `trial()`, we can reference it between DOM changes to reflect our requirement to the participant. Let's reference `required_clicks` in both `const html` and `update_display()`.

```javascript
const required_clicks = 5

const html = `<div>
		<button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-button">
			Click Me!
		</button>
		<p id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-text">
			Click the button ${required_clicks} times to continue.
		</p>
	</div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;

function update_display() {
	const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
	text_element.innerHTML = `Click the button ${required_clicks - clicks} more times to continue.`;
}
```

To recap, we’ve gone over how to end the trial, and even set some conditions that the participant needs to meet before that happens. Now we need to update the default `data` object to reflect the behavior a researcher might want to study.

## Updating the `data` Object

By this point, our `trial()` method is nearly complete. The plugin will show a button for the participant to click on and, eventually, end the trial. Our stimulus also shows a prompt that dynamically counts down the clicks required.

Now we need to log the participant’s interactions as data. First, let's clear out the default `trial_data` object provided in the template. Previously, it’s returned 99 and "hello world!" as arbitrary values for `data1` and `data2`. Let's replace both of those with just one property for the time being, called "clicks." We can set the default value to 0.

```javascript
var trial_data = {
	clicks: 0;
}
```

On next build, we'll see our `clicks` value on the data display when we end the trial. Now, we want the button press to actually update the value, or we'll only ever get that default 0. We can do that by returning to the `button_click_listener` function and writing the `clicks` variable to the `clicks` property on the `trial_data1` object.

```javascript
const button_click_listener = () => {
	clicks++;
	update_display();
	trial_data.clicks = clicks
	if (clicks == required_clicks){
		this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
	}
}
```

Now the next build will return however many clicks we required of the participant&mdash;in this case, 5. 

Having modified the `trial_data` object, it’s time for us to finally return to the `info` object at the top of `index.ts`. The `data` object in `info`&mdash;referenced as `info.data`&mdash;needs to reflect the changes to `trial_data`. As a reminder, this `data` object keeps metadata for the plugin. 

Let’s assume, for example, someone uses our plugin in a study. Another researcher downstream can review the data from that study by calling the plugin’s `info.data` object and checking what was logged directly from the plugin, without having to go into our code. She could use `info.data` to simulate data as well, without running her own experiment. 

Additionally, the docstrings&mdash;annotated with `/** ... */`&mdash;are used to automatically reflect this information in jsPsych’s documentation.

Let’s update `info.data` with that in mind:

```javascript
data: {
	/** clicks records the number of times the participant clicks the button before ending the trial */
	clicks: {
		type: ParameterType.INT
	}
}
```

To recap one more time, we’ve built a stimulus that prompts interaction from the user to end the trial. That interaction is recorded in a `trial_data` object that reads as an argument for ending the trial. What’s recorded in `trial_data` is also reflected for other researchers to review in the `info.data` object.

The next section will continue to involve the `info` constant, this time `info.parameters`.

## Writing Parameters

Our plugin is pretty hard-coded at the moment, but defining feature of a jsPsych plugin is reusability. To make our plugin genuinely reusable, we need to add parameters that the user can define between trials and studies, without going into our `src`.

Let's turn to the `info.parameters` property and review our parameters out the box. The template starts with two arbitrary parameters: `parameter_name1` and `parameter_name2`. As you can see, `parameter_name1` requires an integer and `parameter_name2` requires an image, while both have no defined default. 

Let's ignore `parameter_name2` for now and change `parameter_name1` to `required_clicks`. Since we'll only ever require an integer number of clicks, we can keep our type requirement as is. Let's also set our default in advance to 1:

```javascript
parameters: {
	/** required_clicks sets the number of times the participant must click the button before ending the trial */
	required_clicks: {
		type: ParameterType.INT,
		default: 1,
	},
	parameter_name2: {
		type: ParameterType.IMAGE,
		default: 0,
	}
}
```

On next build, we can just write our desired `required_clicks` value from `examples/index.html`&mdash;as could the user!

Now let's call `required_clicks` in `trial()` so it responds to this input. We'll need to invoke the parameter object `trial`, then call its newly inherited `required_clicks` property. Let's add that to both the `html` constant and the conditional in the `button_click_listener` function. <!--this might make more sense to just write to the local required_clicks const, especially if we were making a big deal about "factoring" earlier-->

```javascript

const html = `<div>
		<button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
			Click Me!
		</button>
		<p>
			Click the button ${trial.required_clicks} times to continue.
		</p>
	</div>`;

const button_click_listener = () => {
	clicks++;
	update_display();
	trial_data.clicks = clicks
	if (trial_data.clicks == trial.required_clicks){
		this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
	}
}
```

On next build, we can define `required_clicks` from `examples/index.html` as often as we want and see those changes reflected immediately on refreshing our browser.

We can continue defining and implementing parameters with this workflow, first adding a new parameter to `info.parameters` then calling it in `trial()`. For instance, let's add a `button_text` parameter so the user can adjust&mdash;you guessed it&mdash;the text on the button. 

We'll use that to finally replace `parameter_name2`, remembering to change the `type` and `default` properties accordingly:

```javascript
parameters: {
	/** required_clicks sets the number of times the participant must click the button before ending the trial */
	required_clicks: {
		type: ParameterType.INT,
		default: 0,
	},
	/** button_text sets text displayed on the button */
	button_text: {
		type: ParameterType.STRING,
		default: "Click Me!",
	}
}
```

Then, we'll call that parameter in `trial()`, specifically in the `html` constant:

```javascript
const html = `<div>
		<button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
			${trial.button_text}
		</button>
		<p>
			Click the button ${trial.required_clicks} times to continue.
		</p>
	</div>`;
```

Finally, let's test it out by running another build and setting both parameters from `examples/index.html`:

```javascript
// From examples/index.html

const trial = {
	type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
	required_clicks: 5,
	button_text: "Pretty please click on me"
}
```

We can see that our parameter inputs overwrite the default values, without needing a new build. This should be a convenient way for us to try out different parameter values, both as a developer and as a user calling this plugin in their studies.
