---
title: "Demo Plugin: PluginMindlessClicking"
pageData:
- migration: new
- sidebar: will rename
---

# Demo Plugin: PluginMindlessClicking

This demo will walk through plugin development for jspsych-contrib, using a very simple example. We'll go step-by-step through writing a plugin that records mindless clicking data from a given participant. This simple demonstration will highlight standards for what makes a distributable plugin, including:

- Writing a `trial()` method
- Basic DOM manipulation
- Writing to `data`
- Writing and referencing plugin parameters
- Testing builds
- Preparing documentation through the `info` object
- Finalizing a pull request with jspsych-contrib using GitHub

:::info
This tutorial assumes you've set up the developer environment using the CLI tool `npx @jspsych/new-plugin`. This automates setup for a new plugin in either JavaScript or TypeScript. For more information about this tool, check out jspsych-contrib's [`README`](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-contrib?tab=readme-ov-file#guidelines-for-contributions).

If you want access to the templates themselves, without running the CLI tool, they are still available in the [jspsych-dev](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-dev) repository. There are [JavaScript](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-dev/tree/main/packages/new-plugin/templates/plugin-template-js) and [TypeScript](https://github.com/jspsych/jspsych-dev/tree/main/packages/new-plugin/templates/plugin-template-ts) templates available. 

A note on nomenclatures. This tutorial uses "on next build" as a regular transition. This references the command `npm run build` that comes with the automated setup. Whenever changes are made to the plugin `src/index.ts`, this command needs to be run before those changes are reflected in the next plugin instance. You can see the plugin's frontend yourself by running this command in the environment directory first, then opening `examples/index.html` in your browser of choice. 

This tutorial also makes recurring but mutually distinct references to "users" and "participants." "Users" refers to researchers using the plugin for their own experiments. We'll assume users are only ever calling the plugin in their own HTML / Javascript files and setting parameters, but never interacting with the plugin `src`. 

"Participants" are the people carrying out the task in an actual study. We'll assume participants aren't seeing any code ever and are only ever interacting with the frontend webpage generated by the plugin instance. 
:::

## Part 1: Review of `index.ts`

Our `index.ts` can be split into two writable sections: `const info` and `class MindlessClickingPlugin`.

`info` is a constant that contains all of the plugin's metadata. This includes its package name, the plugin version, citations, and all inputs and outputs. Inputs are described in the `parameters` object, while outputs are described in the `data` object. 

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const info = <const>{
  name: "plugin-mindless-clicking",
  version: version,
  parameters: {
    //
  },
  data: {
    //
  },
  citations: '__CITATIONS__'
}
```

Both `parameters` and `data` are unique `info` properties and take objects. They're used to automatically generate plugin documentation, once merged to our repository. Notes for documentation are demarcated using the docstrings format `/** ... */`, with descriptions of each parameter and data type. 

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
parameters: {
  /** Provide a clear description of parameter_name that could be used as documentation. */
  parameter_name: {
    //
  },
  /** Provide a clear description of parameter_name2 that could be used as documentation. */
  parameter_name2: {
    //
  },
}
```

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
data: {
  /** Provide a clear description of data1 that could be used as documentation. */
  data1: {
    //
  },
  /** Provide a clear description of data2 that could be used as documentation. */
  data2: {
    //
  },
}
```

Additionally, the `parameters` property is used to check parameter inputs from the user and call default values for any required parameters. We'll describe this more in our section on [Writing Parameters](#writing-parameters).

The `class` declaration, in this case `class MindlessClickingPlugin`, is the second writable portion of `index.ts`. This is where we add the actual script for the plugin. It implements:

* [A static `info` property](plugin-components.md#static-info) that contains `const info` from earlier, describing the plugin's parameters, data generated, and version.
* [A `constructor()`](plugin-components.md#constructor) that accepts an instance of jsPsych. We'll be able to call that instance throughout the `trial()` method below as `this.jsPsych`.
* [A `trial()` method](plugin-components.md#trial) that accepts two arguments: an `HTMLElement` called `display_element`, and a trial parameters object as `trial`. There is an optional third argument to [handle the `on_load` event](../../learn/guides/events.md#on_load) in certain cirumstances. The `trial()` method should *either* invoke `jsPsych.finishTrial()` or <!-- check with Josh to verify this -->should be an `async` function that returns a data object to [end the trial and save data](#part-4-ending-the-trial).

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
class MindlessClickingPlugin implements JsPsychPlugin<Info> {
  static info = info;

  constructor(private jsPsych: JsPsych) { }

  trial(display_element: HTMLElement, trial: TrialType<Info>){
    //
  }
}
```

Since it's the critical piece that implements plugin behavior, the next four sections will focus exclusively on writing the `trial()` method. Some preliminary information on its arguments:
* `display_element` is the DOM element where jsPsych content is being rendered. This parameter will be an `HTMLElement`, and you can use it to modify the portion of the document that jsPsych controls.
* `trial` is an object containing all of the parameters specified. We'll invoke this throughout our script to trigger the behavior we want on the document.

Let's start by adding elements to `display_element` and manipulating the DOM.

## Part 2: Adding Elements to DOM

This section will go over how to update the webpage to display what we want to the participant.

There are two things we need to do before anything else. First, let's go to `const info` and set the `default` value for each generic parameter to `0`, rather than `undefined`. This won't do anything to affect our plugin behavior as we develop it, but jsPsych needs a default parameter value to run the plugin at all. `parameter_name2` will throw a warning since it expects a string path to an image, but that won't break any of our builds going forward. 

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
parameters: {
  /** Provide a clear description of parameter_name that could be used as documentation. */
  parameter_name: {
    type: ParameterType.INT,
    default: 0,
  },
  /** Provide a clear description of parameter_name2 that could be used as documentation. */
  parameter_name2: {
    type: ParameterType.IMAGE,
    default: 0,
  },
}
```

Second, we should delete the `jsPsych.finishTrial()` call in the default template. We're only doing this for now so that we can see changes to the DOM, as we run new builds. Otherwise, the `trial()` execution ends as soon as the method is run. We’ll reintroduce this call later anyway, since it's required for a compliant plugin package.

Now that we’ve done that, let’s write something for the participant to interact with: a basic button in HTML. We'll wrap this button, and any other HTML elements we want presented to the user on loading the plugin instance, in a single `<div>` node, then assign that node to a single `const html`. We'll also assign a class to our button to style it with jsPsych’s built-in CSS:

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const html = `<div>
    <button class="jspsych-btn">
      Click Me!
    </button>
  </div>`;
```

For the participant to actually see the button, we need to add our button to `display_element`. Let's assign it as a string value to `display_element.innerHTML`. 

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const html = `<div>
    <button class="jspsych-btn">
      Click Me!
    </button>
  </div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;
```

:::note
`innerHTML` is a property inherited by `HTMLelement` types and is what stores DOM elements that participants can interact with. For more about `display_element` properties, reference [Mozilla’s documentation]() on the `HTMLelement` type.

We could make the assignment directly to `.innerHTML`. However, we want to instill some best practices. By storing our string in a separate `html` variable, we preserve readability and allow us to modify our `html` in other cases&mdash;say, in an accumulator function that iteratively adds new elements to `html`.
:::

Great! On first build, we can open `examples/index.html` in our browser and see a basic stimulus for participants to interact with. We can even make our demand of the participant more explicit by adding a paragraph element underneath the button. 

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const html = `<div>
    <button class="jspsych-btn">
      Click Me!
    </button>
    <p>
      Click the button.
    </p>
  </div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;
```

## Part 3: Event Listeners & DOM Manipulation

So, we have a button available for the participant to see and click on. Now we want the button to actually do something when clicked. To get our button to dynamically respond to the participant's button presses, we need to use an event listener. This will be a recurring tool in our Javascript kit, letting us do everything from updating the DOM to timing the trial end to logging participant data.

In short, event listeners execute functions whenever an event&mdash;like a click&mdash;is delivered to a specified target&mdash;like the button. We can add listeners to any element using the method `addEventListener`, which takes two arguments: the event, and the function.

Since `"click"` is already a mouse event built into Javascript, we can use that as our event argument. You can also check out [W3Schools' documentation](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_events.asp) for a list of other events already referenced by Javascript, as well as ways to define your own `CustomEvents`.

With our event covered, we just have to write the function we want our listener to execute. Let's keep it simple for now and write an empty function. We can add to it later as we think of things we want button clicks to do.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
function button_click_listener(){
}
```

However useless for the time being, we can now add our event listener to the button! The most direct way to do this would be with the `querySelector` Javascript method. We'll use the method to pick an element out of `display_element` and run `addEventListener` on the output. 

`querySelector` picks HTML elements based on CSS selectors, which are used to style bits of a webpage. The simplest CSS selectors are element names themselves, like a `div` or a `button`. Since we have just one `button` on our DOM, we could select the only `"button"` from `display_element` before adding our event listener. Since we’re atomizing our steps as a best practice, we’ll break that down into two steps, assigning the selected element to `const button` and then adding the listener to `button`.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
function button_click_listener(){
}

const button = display_element.querySelector("button");
button.addEventListener("click", button_click_listener);
```

While that works for now, it's not exactly flexible. `querySelector` will always pick out the first match. Say we have multiple buttons on our DOM, but we want a specific one to react to clicks. We'd only ever add our listener to the first "button" element in `display_element`.

We can fix this by just adding a different kind of CSS selector, an `id`, to our `html` constant from before. An `id` is unique, applied to only one DOM element at a time, and referenced with a hash (#). Let's give our button `id=“jspsych-mindless-clicking-button”`, then use that `id`, `”#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button”` as our `querySelector` argument.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const html = `<div>
    <button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
      Click Me!
    </button>
    <p>
      Click the button.
    </p>
  </div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;

function button_click_listener(){
}

const button = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
button.addEventListener("click", button_click_listener);
```

It’s worth noting that classes, like the `class=”jspsych-btn”` used for styling, also work as CSS selectors. Like an `id`, a `class` is only ever assigned to an element by the developer, but unlike an `id`, it's non-unique and can be re-applied across multiple elements.

With this knowledge of selectors and listeners, we can put a dynamic click counter on the DOM. Let's introduce a `var clicks` and set it to 0. Then, let's actually make our listener do something by having `button_click_listener` iterate on `clicks` by plus 1.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
var clicks = 0;

function button_click_listener(){
  clicks++;
}
```

On next build, our plugin will start counting participant clicks in the background by updating the `clicks` variable. We could verify that by writing `console.log(clicks)` into `button_click_listener`, running another build, opening `examples/index.html`, and watching the developer console while clicking the button.

We can also make the DOM show this count directly to the participant. Let's use another `querySelector` to do that. We'll select the paragraph element, assign it to `const text_element`, then assign a string referencing `clicks` to its `innerHTML`.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
var clicks = 0;

function button_click_listener(){
  clicks++;
  const text_element = display_element.querySelector("p");
  text_element.innerHTML = `You've clicked the button ${clicks} times`;
}
```

We can once again make this more precise and flexible by giving our paragraph an `id` and reading that to `querySelector`.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const html = `<div>
    <button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
      Click Me!
    </button>
    <p id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-text">
      Click the button.
    </p>
  </div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;

var clicks = 0;

function button_click_listener(){
  clicks++;
  const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
  text_element.innerHTML = `You've clicked the button ${clicks} times`;
}
```

We can instill another best practice here by compartmentalizing the steps that update our DOM into a helper function. We'll define these separately from `button_click_listener`, or "factor them out." That way, if we want other events to update the DOM, we can call that same function iteratively without redundantly copying and rewriting it. Better yet, if we choose to update the DOM in new ways, we only need to rewrite the helper function. Let's call this helper function `update_display`. 

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
function update_display() {
  const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
  text_element.innerHTML = `You've clicked the button ${clicks} times`;
}

function button_click_listener(){
  clicks++;
  update_display();
}
```

Now we have a robust interface for the participant to interact with. She can not only click away at the button to her heart's content but get live feedback on her clicks.

These last two sections focused primarily on basic Javascript skills. The next section will pivot back to some jsPsych specific methods that we can use to make our build into a fully functional plugin, ready for distribution and use by other researchers.

## Part 4: Ending the Trial

At this point, the participant has a clicker to tap endlessly. Great! As a jsPsych plugin though, this isn't very useful. We aren’t logging anything that the participant as data. Nor is there any way for the trial to end, trapping our participant in clicker limbo. Luckily, the solutions to both these issues are nearly one-in-the-same. 

As previously mentioned, the core jsPsych method for ending a plugin trial is `jsPsych.finishTrial()`. This method always takes the `data` object as its argument. By calling an end to our trial, we also stage our data for storage.

We call `finishTrial()` by referencing the plugin's jsPsych instance as `this.jsPsych`. We'll have to do this whenever we invoke a jsPsych method. That means we'll have to tweak the way we define our listener function. To break `this.jsPsych` down, `this` references the latest execution context, while jsPsych references any jsPsych instance in that context. If we call `this.jsPsych` in the function as is, `this` will reference the function, whose scope won’t include jsPsych by default.

To get around this, we can just declare `button_click_listener` as a constant that stores an arrow function. Now, `this` will reference the plugin context `trial()`.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const button_click_listener = () => {
  clicks++;
  update_display();
  this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
}
```
:::note Arrow Functions
The reason the above works as an arrow function, rather than a defined function, is because arrow functions are unbound to `this` and arguments. As a defined function, we would have to add `jsPsych` as its own argument to our `button_click_listener`, which makes are code less readable and flexible. For more on arrow functions, feel free to check out the [Mozilla docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions)
:::

On next build, we can click the button to immediately end the trial and see the default `data` object.

We can also couch `finishTrial()` in a conditional if we want the participant to still click more than once. Let's say the participant needs to click the button 5 times before the trial will end.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const button_click_listener = () => {
  clicks++;
  update_display();
  if (clicks == 5){
    this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
  }
}
```

As usual, we can compartmentalize this minimum clicks value into a separate `required_clicks` constant for some added flexibility.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const required_clicks = 5

const button_click_listener = () => {
  clicks++;
  update_display();
  if (clicks == required_clicks){
    this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
  }
}
```

If we move our declaration of `required_clicks` to the top of `trial()`, we can reference it between DOM changes to reflect our requirement to the participant. Let's reference `required_clicks` in both `const html` and `update_display()`. 

This means we'll be replacing the strings for `<p>` in `const html` and `const text_element` in `update_display()`. Rather than both reference `click`, they'll reference `required_clicks` and `required_clicks - clicks`, respectively.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const required_clicks = 5

const html = `<div>
    <button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-button">
      Click Me!
    </button>
    <p id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-text">
      Click the button ${required_clicks} times to continue.
    </p>
  </div>`;
display_element.innerHTML = html;

function update_display() {
  const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
  text_element.innerHTML = `Click the button ${required_clicks - clicks} more times to continue.`;
}
```

To recap, we’ve gone over how to end the trial, and even set some conditions that the participant needs to meet before that happens. Now we need to update the default `data` object to reflect the behavior a researcher might want to study.

## Part 5: Updating the `data` Object

By this point, our `trial()` method is nearly complete. The plugin will show a button for the participant to click on and, eventually, end the trial. Our stimulus also shows a prompt that dynamically counts down the clicks required.

Now we need to log the participant’s interactions as data. First, let's clear out the default `trial_data` object provided in the template. Previously, it’s returned 99 and "hello world!" as arbitrary values for `data1` and `data2`. Let's replace both of those with just one property for the time being, called "clicks." We can set the default value to 0.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
var trial_data = {
  clicks: 0,
}
```

On next build, we'll see our `clicks` value on the data display when we end the trial. Now, we want the button press to actually update the value, or we'll only ever get that default 0. We can do that by returning to the `button_click_listener` function and writing the `clicks` variable to the `clicks` property on the `trial_data` object.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const button_click_listener = () => {
  clicks++;
  update_display();
  trial_data.clicks = clicks
  if (clicks == required_clicks){
    this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
  }
}
```

Now the next build will return however many clicks we required of the participant&mdash;in this case, 5. 

Having modified the `trial_data` object, it’s time for us to finally return to the `info` object at the top of `index.ts`. The `data` object in `info`&mdash;referenced as `info.data`&mdash;needs to reflect the changes to `trial_data`. As a reminder, this `data` object keeps metadata for the plugin. 

Let’s assume, for example, someone uses our plugin in a study. Another researcher downstream can review the data from that study by calling the plugin’s `info.data` object and checking what was logged directly from the plugin, without having to go into our code. She could use `info.data` to simulate data as well, without running her own experiment. 

Additionally, the docstrings&mdash;annotated with `/** ... */`&mdash;are used to automatically reflect this information in jsPsych’s documentation.

Let’s update `info.data` with that in mind:

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
data: {
  /** clicks records the number of times the participant clicks the button before ending the trial */
  clicks: {
    type: ParameterType.INT
  }
}
```

To recap one more time, we’ve built a stimulus that prompts interaction from the user to end the trial. That interaction is recorded in a `trial_data` object that's read as an argument to end the trial. What’s recorded in `trial_data` is also reflected for other researchers to review in the `info.data` object.

The next section will continue to involve the `info` constant, this time `info.parameters`.

## Part 6: Writing Parameters

Our plugin is pretty hard-coded at the moment, but defining feature of a jsPsych plugin is reusability. To make our plugin genuinely reusable, we need to add parameters that the user can define between trials and studies, without going into our `src`.

Let's turn to the `info.parameters` property and review our parameters out the box. The template starts with two arbitrary parameters: `parameter_name` and `parameter_name2`. As you can see, `parameter_name` requires an integer and `parameter_name2` requires an image, while both have no defined default. 

Let's ignore `parameter_name2` for now and change `parameter_name` to `required_clicks`. Since we'll only ever require an integer number of clicks, we can keep our type requirement as is. Let's also set our default in advance to 1:

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
parameters: {
  /** required_clicks sets the number of times the participant must click the button before ending the trial */
  required_clicks: {
    type: ParameterType.INT,
    default: 1,
  },
  parameter_name2: {
    type: ParameterType.IMAGE,
    default: 0,
  }
}
```

On next build, we can just write our desired `required_clicks` value from `examples/index.html`&mdash;as could the user!

Now let's call `required_clicks` in `trial()` so it responds to this input. We'll need to invoke the parameter object `trial`, then call its newly inherited `required_clicks` property. Let's use that to assign `trial.required_clicks`, instead of the hard-coded integer 5, to `const required_clicks`.

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const required_clicks = trial.required_clicks

const html = `<div>
    <button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
      Click Me!
    </button>
    <p>
      Click the button ${required_clicks} times to continue.
    </p>
  </div>`;

function update_display() {
  const text_element = display_element.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
  text_element.innerHTML = `Click the button ${required_clicks - clicks} more times to continue.`;
}

const button_click_listener = () => {
  clicks++;
  update_display();
  trial_data.clicks = clicks
  if (trial_data.clicks == required_clicks){
    this.jsPsych.finishTrial(trial_data);
  }
}
```

On next build, we can define `required_clicks` from `examples/index.html` as often as we want and see those changes reflected immediately on refreshing our browser.

We can continue defining and implementing parameters with this workflow, first adding a new parameter to `info.parameters` then calling it in `trial()`. For instance, let's add a `button_text` parameter so the user can adjust&mdash;you guessed it&mdash;the text on the button. 

We'll use that to finally replace `parameter_name2`, remembering to change the `type` and `default` properties accordingly:

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
parameters: {
  /** required_clicks sets the number of times the participant must click the button before ending the trial */
  required_clicks: {
    type: ParameterType.INT,
    default: 0,
  },
  /** button_text sets text displayed on the button */
  button_text: {
    type: ParameterType.STRING,
    default: "Click Me!",
  }
}
```

Then, we'll call that parameter in `trial()`, specifically in the `html` constant:

```javascript title="src/index.ts"
const html = `<div>
    <button id="jspsych-mindless-clicking-button" class="jspsych-btn">
      ${trial.button_text}
    </button>
    <p>
      Click the button ${trial.required_clicks} times to continue.
    </p>
  </div>`;
```

Finally, let's test it out by running another build and setting both parameters from `examples/index.html`:

```javascript title="examples/index.html"
const trial = {
  type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
  required_clicks: 5,
  button_text: "Pretty please click on me"
}
```

We can see that our parameter inputs overwrite the default values, without needing a new build. This should be a convenient way for us to try out different parameter values, both as a developer and as a user calling this plugin in their studies.

## Part 7: Testing

Our plugin is now feature complete. We've designed a reusable package that takes parameters, generates stimuli, and logs participant data. What's left for us to do as a developer is test those features. This way, we can give researchers our best assurance that our plugin won't break unexpectedly. 

Automated testing for jsPsych packages is handled with [Jest](). While we won't go into much detail, we'll write some simple tests to illustrate basic conventions for checking code. We'll write our tests around two recurring conventions specifically, one native to Jest and the other structured around jsPsych's `test-utils`.

From this point forward, the tutorial will have you work in `src/index.spec.ts`.

### Jest syntax

Jest supplies the syntax for organizing our tests. We'll use the `describe()` method to block multiple tests and run the plugin through each. We'll write individual tests with the `it()` method, which is just an alias for Jest's `test()`. Both `describe()` and `it()` take a name and a function as its two arguments. Names are just strings we author to say what code we're testing and for what behavior. They aren't essential for executing our tests correctly, but they keep our test code readable if written well. Functions contain the test script itself and return a Boolean for whether the code passes.

Since `describe()` is just a method for blocking tests, its function argument will amount to a sequence of `it()` calls. Meanwhile, the function argument for `it()` will nest script for a specific test. The name arguments will represent these suites through the terminal so that a human developer can read and follow along. So, the name in `describe()` says what code is passing through the whole test block&mdash;the plugin&mdash;while the name in `it()` says the specific thing we want that code to do.

```javascript
describe("my plugin", () => {
  it("should do x", () => {
    // test script
  });
})
```

Meanwhile, individual `it()` tests will return evaluated assertions about how our code behaves. All assertions are handled in Jest using the `expect()` module. `expect()` takes as its argument any code that returns a value. `expect()` then let's us access a range of "matcher" methods that check the value returned by that code. Here's a trivial example to demonstrate the logic.

```javascript
describe("my trivial example", () => {
  it("proves that 1 + 1 = 2", () => {
    expect(1 + 1).toBe(2)
  });
})
```
Every meaningful Jest test going forward will follow this same structure. `describe()` will nest a suite of `it()` tests, each checking a series of `expect` assertions for end-to-end coverage of a plugin's behavior.

### jsPsych `test-utils`

jsPsych also supplies a number of important helper functions for testing, found in `packages/test-utils`. You can find a complete reference for `test-utils` [here](/reference/core/test-utils.md).

For our purposes, we'll be repeatedly calling the `startTimeline()` method. `startTimeline()` runs an instance of our plugin and returns a Promise with one or more of the following:
- `jsPsych`: The jsPsych instance
- `displayElement`: The displayElement object from `trial()` in `src`
- `getHTML()`: A shorthand method for `displayElement.innerHTML`
- `getData()`: The data object read to `finishTrial()`
- `expectFinished()`: A helper method that outputs a Boolean and returns `True` when the plugin instance ends
- `expectRunning()`: A helper method that outputs a Boolean and returns `True` if the plugin instance remains active

By taking specific outputs from `startTimeline()`, we can verify a range of default and configurable plugin behaviors. Just note that since `startTimeline()` returns a Promise, we should make the function in `it()` asynchronous or our test will fail.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
describe("my plugin", () => {
  it("does x", async () => {
    const { 
      jsPsych, 
      displayElement, 
      getHTML, 
      getData, 
      expectFinished, 
      expectRunning 
    } = await startTimeline([
      {
        type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking
      }
    ])

    // test script for default plugin config
  });
})
```

### Example Test: Default Behavior

As a good initial test of our plugin, let's make sure its default behavior works as intended.

We can use `startTimeline()` to call a default instance of our plugin, with just `type` defined. We'll add outputs from this instance gradually over the course of building out this test, but for now, we'll start with `displayElement`.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
describe("my plugin", () => {
  it("render and run with defaults", async () => {
    const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
      {
        type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking
      }
    ])
  });
})
```

Just like in `trial()`, we can use `querySelector()` and access specific DOM elements in `displayElement`. Let's use that to assign one constant to the button and another to the instructional text.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
describe("my plugin", () => {
  it("render and run with defaults", async () => {
    const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
  const text = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");
  });
})
```

We can make a series of `expect()` assertions on these two constants to verify their behavior. We'll call `toBeTruthy` to check for truthy instances of the button and text. We'll also call `toBe()` to check that the button is a button element, the text is a paragraph element, and the text and button are both presenting their default strings. Note that, for the string checks, we've added a `.trim()` call to get rid of any whitespace between the string itself and their tags.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
describe("my plugin", () => {
  it("render and run with defaults", async () => {
    const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
      {
        type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking
      }
    ])

    const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
    const text = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");

    expect(button).toBeTruthy();
    expect(button.tagName).toBe("BUTTON");
    expect(button.innerHTML).trim().toBe("Click Me!");

    expect(text).toBeTruthy();
    expect(text.tagName).toBe("P");
    expect(text.innerHTML).trim().toBe(`Click the button 1 times to continue.`);
  });
})
```

At this point, we've written a test we can actually run from the commandline. Using `npm run test`, we can see our test show up in the terminal, according to however we described it in our `describe()` and `it()` arguments. We can also see a green checkmark indicating that it passed, meaning our button and text elements are rendering as expected.

Of course, that's not the extent of what we need the plugin to do by default. We also need it to finish when the button is clicked. We can verify that by taking the `expectFinished()` output from `startTimeline()`, triggering a click event on our `button` constant with Javascript's `click()` method, then calling `expectFinished()`.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
describe("my plugin", () => {
  it("render and run with defaults", async () => {
    const { expectFinished, displayElement } = await startTimeline([
      {
        type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking
      }
    ])

    const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
    const text = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");

    expect(button).toBeTruthy();
    expect(button.tagName).toBe("BUTTON");
    expect(button.innerHTML).trim().toBe("Click Me!");

    expect(text).toBeTruthy();
    expect(text.tagName).toBe("P");
    expect(text.innerHTML).trim().toBe(`Click the button 1 times to continue.`);

    button.click();
    expectFinished();
  });
})
```

On running the test again, we see that everything still passes. To recap, we can write a satisfactory test for default plugin behavior by:
- Using `startTimeline()` to call a default plugin instance
- Using Jest assertions to check that DOM elements are correctly rendered
- Triggering events that should end the plugin instance, and using `expectFinished()` to check

### Example Test: User Parameters

Now that we have a test for default behaviors, we may as well check to see that our parameters take appropriate user inputs and change the plugin's behavior predictably.

Let's start by defining a constant for each parameter input. Just like with our `trial()` method, defining these inputs as constants beforehand will let us continue referencing the same values throughout the test. Once we've done that, we can read these constants to each parameter and call a plugin instance with `startTimeline()`.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("runs with user parameters", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;
  const button_text_input = "Pretty Please Click Me"

  const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
      button_text: button_text_input,
    }
  ])
});
```

Let's first check that the DOM elements reflect these parameter inputs as expected. Once again, we'll assign our DOM elements to their own constants, then call an assertion on each. This time, our assertion will be to expect both the button and text to reflect the new parameter inputs.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("runs with user parameters", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;
  const button_text_input = "Pretty Please Click Me"

  const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
      button_text: button_text_input,
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
  const text = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");

  expect(button.innerHTML).trim().toBe(button_text_input);
  expect(text.innerHTML).trim().toBe(`Click the button ${required_clicks_input} times to continue.`)
});
```
As with our first test, we can run this in the terminal now that `it()` has an assertion. You can see that our plugin passes so far.

To make this really comprehensive, we could use a `for` loop to check that the display text updates as expected, counting down with each click, while the text on the button remains consistent.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("runs with user parameters", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;
  const button_text_input = "Pretty Please Click Me"

  const { displayElement, expectFinished } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
      button_text: button_text_input
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
  const text = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");

  expect(button.innerHTML).trim().toBe(button_text_input);
  expect(text.innerHTML).trim().toBe(`Click the button ${required_clicks_input} times to continue.`)

  for (let clicks = 0; clicks < required_clicks_input; clicks++) {
    button.click();
    expect(button.innerHTML).trim().toBe(button_text_input);
    expect(text.innerHTML).trim().toBe(`Click the button ${required_clicks_input - clicks - 1} more times to continue.`)
  }
});
```

To top it off, we can take the `expectFinished` output from `startTimeline()` and see that the plugin instance ends once the clicks requirement has been met.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("runs with user parameters", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;
  const button_text_input = "Pretty Please Click Me"

  const { displayElement, expectFinished } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
      button_text: button_text_input
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
  const text = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-text");

  expect(button.innerHTML).toBe(button_text_input);
  expect(text.innerHTML).toBe(`Click the button ${required_clicks_input} times to continue.`)

  for (let clicks = 0; clicks < required_clicks_input; clicks++) {
    button.click();
    expect(button.innerHTML).trim().toBe(button_text_input);
    expect(text.innerHTML).trim().toBe(`Click the button ${required_clicks_input - clicks - 1} more times to continue.`)
  }

  expectFinished();
});
```

Run this test one last time and you'll see that it still passes. We now know our plugin reliably and predictably takes parameter inputs from the users.


### Example Test: Edge Cases

We should also make sure our plugin can handle edge cases as expected. Edge cases occur when the user reads inputs that come as close as possible to triggering a change in our plugin's state&mdash;from `Running` to `Finished`&mdash;without doing so.

Let's consider a simple edge case. Assuming we require *n* clicks from the participant, the plugin shouldn't end after any click less than or equal to the *n*th click minus 1. Let's start writing our test with a setup similar to `it("runs with user parameters")`, with a valid `required_clicks_input` value assigned to a constant, a plugin instance that takes `required_click_input`, and the DOM button assigned to a constant. 


```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("doesn't end after less than n required clicks", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;

  const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");
});
```

We'll now write another loop that repeatedly clicks `button`. However, this `for` loop will only continue so long as `clicks` is less than `required_clicks_input` minus 1.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("doesn't end after less than n required clicks", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;

  const { displayElement } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");

  for (let clicks = 0; clicks < required_clicks_input - 1; clicks++) {
    button.click()
  }
});
```

Now, let's take the `expectRunning` output from `startTimeline()` and call that after our loop to complete our test.

```javascript title="src/index.spec.ts"
it("doesn't end after less than n required clicks", async () => {
  const required_clicks_input = 20;

  const { displayElement, expectRunning } = await startTimeline([
    {
      type: jsPsychPluginMindlessClicking,
      required_clicks: required_clicks_input,
    }
  ])

  const button = displayElement.querySelector("#jspsych-mindless-clicking-button");

  for (let clicks = 0; clicks < required_clicks_input - 1; clicks++) {
    button.click()
  }

  expectRunning()
});
```

Now we can run this test and see that it passes, meaning our plugin does not close so long as `button` is clicked less than the amount specified by `required_clicks_input`. Our plugin successfully handles its edge case!
